---
id: 5796
title: 'Letters From The Front: On The State &#038; Being'
date: 2012-08-20T21:56:18+00:00
author: Sam Morris
excerpt: After his interview with sole last week, Kwes reflects on his own beliefs and views
layout: post
guid: http://www.lessonsix.com/?p=5796
permalink: /2012/08/letters-from-the-front-on-the-state-being/
image:
  - http://www.lessonsix.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/lettersfrom71.jpg
dsq_thread_id:
  - 812487629
categories:
  - Feature
  - Letters From The Front
  - Uncategorized
---
After having answered the last questions of [our interview](http://www.lessonsix.com/2012/07/letters-from-the-front-on-the-state-of-being-an-interview-with-sole/), sole had asked me about my involvement in the Montreal student protests, what I thought of the movement and whether it was non-violent. I could have simply responded that my involvement was nil aside from partaking in a few of the casseroles protests. Even then I brandished no sign, shouted no slogan, my pots and pans where I left them, in the kitchen cupboards; little more than a curious observer out for a stroll. So what then? Where did and do I stand politically? I felt the need to attempt to answer a question which sole never asked and perhaps did not care to know, but something compelled me to write him a long, rambling and never-proofread explanation of my far from fully formed (or informed, for that matter) beliefs on politics, society and humanity.

<!--more-->

Regarding the Montreal student protests, I would say that they are by and large as non-violent as a movement can exist within an environment seemingly hostile to the very rights it claims to uphold, the freedom to peaceful assemble and of expression. These rights seem to be tolerated in small doses and a slew of protests happen daily; however, if the duration of any given demonstration extends from days to weeks to months, this tolerance deteriorates and reaction, both public and political, grows increasingly hostile. As with any grouping of people, there exists a minority who are more militant in their philosophy, the quote-unquote radicals in the pejorative, who engage in violent protest (intimidation, property damage, violent confrontation with police).

In “From Dictatorship to Democracy: A Conceptual Framework for Liberation”, Gene Sharp states that “by placing confidence in violent means, one has chosen the very type of struggle with which the oppressors nearly always have superiority”. I believe this is to be true, whether an oppressive dictatorship or the freest of democracies. Dictatorships respond with the end-game violence of opening fire on their citizens and leaving bodies piled up in the streets; democracies at least have the compassion to coat the bullets in rubber before they shoot you in the face. Dictatorships enforce order with deadly force at the first expletive thrown, democracies maintain order until the first bottle is thrown and then enforce it with truncheons and projectiles. In dictatorships rights and freedoms never existed, in democracies they are stripped away to “maintain order”.

This is where the militant minority’s impact is magnified exponentially; their actions provoking an already reactionary and increasingly militarized police demonstrate their superiority of force and increase pressure on politicians to apply short term fixes, restoring order by writ, which in turn puts pressure on police to crack down. Heavy-handed policing and police brutality act as a recruitment tool for this militant minority, whose actions are then used as justification for militarized crowd control tactics, and the vicious circle goes unbroken. As the Occupy and Montreal student protests could be summed up as demonstrating against a minority’s ability to impose their will on the majority, I disagree with sole that people should be able to protest/resist as they see fit, because the repercussions to the actions of the militant minority does not respect the time and the space of the non-violent protesters.

My own beliefs on what ails us and prescriptions for remedying them differs from sole’s, but I would say are no less idealistic. My interest in politics and our society has been undergoing a bit of a change of direction over the past few years, where I&#8217;ve been barely scratching the surface of behavioral economics and evolutionary psychology. Dan Ariely, a professor of psychology and behavioral economics, states that a flaw of economics is that it presupposes rational agents (us). Behavioral economics focuses on the limits of rationality of economic agents in their decision making, both in market decisions and personal choice. Evolutionary psychology views human nature as the result of evolved psychological adaptations, the result of natural selection; the selection of genes which influence traits for fitness, allowing the organism to survive in its surrounding environment. Of course, for genes to be selected for fitness, that necessitates genes being selected against, genes which are detrimental to survival.

> I disagree with sole at people should be able to protest/resist as they see fit, because the repercussions to the actions of the militant minority does not respect the space of non-violent protesters

Consider the persistence of racism and xenophobia, or generally, the fear of the “other”. Until roughly 10,000 years ago all humans lived in hunter gatherer societies where the other (someone outside of your tribe) was a potential threat to the individual or the group, be it murder, rape or robbery, so genes would be selected which influenced a fight or flight reaction. There are also theories that ethnocentrism evolved as an indicator for coalition membership and may have actually contributed to the development of cooperation. As small tribal groups gave way to civilization, groupings of humans increased exponentially, in a sense, larger tribes but with more strangers, impossible to know each and every person as one would in smaller communal groups. Racism, xenophobia and ethnocentricity, though not necessitated for survival in the new environment, are not necessarily an impediment to survival and there is thus no selective pressure to eliminate them.

In this light, I would say the central problem to society and humanity is the conflict of interests between the individual, the immediate group and that of the species (and furthermore, the environment). I do believe that the institutions existing in society precipitate problems facing society insofar as they are populated by humans, their structures built on the bases of our decisions which have a lot more going on below them then we realize. We build these structures and as society evolves in terms of compassion and ethics, these structures once in place evolve at a slower rate as long as there is a significant portion of the population who benefit from the existing structure, no matter how menially or if only in perception. This is naturally where protest and organisation come into place, either by making those who have interest in maintaining the current structure understand the negative impact on others in society or by providing enough significant pressure by disruption of the current order.

I believe that Ariely’s assertion of the flaw of economics also applies to the flaw of any system of organisation, the belief that humans are rational actors. I do not subscribe to the belief that humans are intrinsically good, I believe that humans have the potential to do good, which is realised quite regularly, as well as the potential to do evil, also realised quite regularly. Thus, policing is a necessity to protect humans from themselves, the existence of laws and repercussions to breaking them acting as a deterrent against widespread lawlessness and I do not believe that the investigation and persecution of crimes after the fact is something to be mocked. Police forces, populated by humans, are subject to all of the same biases, irrationality and behaviour which exist in all humans. In their position of power the capacity to do harm is high, as with any institution which has any influence over the public good.

So what would be a better way to approach things? Our society would have to have a greater respect and fuller understanding of the scientific method and dispassionate inquiry, which would require a shift in educational policy. Things which we take for granted as common sense and the way-things-are would need to be subject to this inquiry and would likely undo some of our conceptions about ourselves, as science regularly undoes conceptions about the world around us. The sun once revolved around the world, or so was accepted as fact, after all. Institutions and any laws or policies need to be prescribed with the understanding that our capacity for rationality is limited. This would require panels of experts from a wide array of fields being consulted in the process of making these decisions. Imagine, for instance, if the police, instead of operating in a “maintain and enforce” order capacity, instead existed to maintain, enforce and nurture order? What would that entail? Your traditional boots-on-the-ground officers on patrols and detectives, but also a larger civilian back-office force looking at crime statistics from a scientific perspective and implementing policy in the appropriate manner. Imagine crowd control tactics which were informed by psychological studies on how angry individuals or groups react to the presence of police officers, or if studies claiming to show that the presence of large trees in neighbourhoods can reduce crime could then be implemented in high-crime areas.

If we could better understand and place greater emphasis on the influences on our decision making and the limits of our rationality, perhaps we could organise society in a manner where the environmental factors which promulgate the continuation of negative traits could better be addressed and controlled for. Academic pursuits and institutions working in cohesion could test theories concerning the public good more effectively and the appropriate changes could be implemented with greater ease. In closing, it needs to be understood and internalized that while the institutions and systems we create foster inequality, violence and exploitation, these systems do not exist without the presence of humans, so to address these problems and questions we need to better understand ourselves and our limitations. This may be utopian, but something is quite obviously broken, and it needs to be fixed with something other than duct tape and good intentions.

_This post was written by Canadian rap-artist Kwes, who occasionally shares [his spleen](http://www.lessonsix.com/category/feature/letters-from-the-front/) with us at Lesson Six. Why not learn more about [Rifle Eyes](http://rifleeyesmusic.wordpress.com/) & [Kwes](http://www.lessonsix.com/2011/12/letters-from-the-front-the-report-of-hip-hops-death-was-an-exaggeration/kwes.bandcamp.com) while you’re here?_